<!--
.. title: Substack Considered Harmful
.. slug: substack-considered-harmful
.. date: 2023-04-27 05:21:20 UTC-04:00
.. tags: writing,cuulture,online,internet,society,problems,substack
.. status: Draft
.. category: 
.. link: 
.. description: 
.. type: text
-->

!["Echo and the Lightman" by duane.schoon is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 2.0. To
view a copy of this license, visit
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/2.0/?ref=openverse.](/images/Echo_And_The_Lightman.jpg)

_Editor's Note: I used ChatGPT to help me be less of a windbag. The intent, if not the exact phrasing, is entirely mine._

## Setting The Scene

In my [previous
post](https://playingwithquicksilver.net/posts/the-only-winning-move-is-not-to-play/)
I wrote about my waning interest in contemporary politics due to the
disproportionate toll it takes on my time, energy and well being.

The terminus on that journey of realization turned out to be the simple concrete
act of turning off a bunch of politics streams I had coming into my information
feed. Among them were a number of [Substacks](https://substack.com/).

<!-- TEASER_END -->

The resulting mental breathing room enabled me to integrate a number of parallel
trains of thought whose tracks might never have crossed otherwise.

As a technologist, I feel very strongly that ethics are important. It's
important that as individuals we take personal responsibility for the ethical
outcomes from what we build. I also think it behooves us as a community to at
least be mindful of the ethical outcomes of what we build as a community.

You would have to be living under a rock not to have at least encountered the
idea that many of the algorithmically driven social media platforms are having a
net corrosive effect on our health, both as a society and as individuals. I
recently read an excellent book on the topic entitled [Social Warming: The
Dangerous and Polarising Effects of Social
Media](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/55711307-social-warming). Far from
being some kind of paranoid neo-luddite screed, this is a very thoughtful and
erudite examination of how these algorithms mesh with the low level "herd"
aspects of human behavior to disastrous effect. It's a compelling and accessible
read that I recommend to everyone. 

While the book and much of the modern discourse on this topic rightly surround
platforms like Facebook and, sadly, increasingly Twitter, platforms like
Substack which might seem to provide ready solutions may be causing some unique
problems of its own.

## Harmful, You Say?

So, let's talk about Substack. For the uninitiated, this is a platform where
pundits, journalists, and generally anyone who wants to write can publish their
short or long form work and have it be read by "subscribers". Most offer "tiers"
where free tier folks get the occasionally throw-away post and paid subscribers
get "The Good Stuff" which may include various perks.

Sounds good, right? There needs to be a platform where independent journalists,
deplatformed pundits and others can exercise their constitutionally granted
rights of free speech. That *IS* good, at least on the face of it.

I see a number of problems, ranging from the merely annoying to potentially
quite serious.

### Frankly My Dear, You Still Need an Editor

Traditionally when a writer submits their work for publication, whether to a
newspaper, magazine, or even an organization's blog or newsletter, an editor
carefully proof-reads the piece, both for obvious problems like grammar and
spelling errors, but perhaps even more importantly for conciseness and
suitability to task. Does the piece live up to the name on the masthead? Will it
repay the reader for their contribution in time and effort?

These are important questions, and I often find myself wondering if many
Substack writers as them of themselves at all anymore.

I don't really care what manner of fun T-shirts you're wearing these days, or
that you feel persecuted by the mainstream press who unfairly cancelled you.
These are commiseration best performed with friends over a beverage of choice
rather than broadcast to a larger audience.

Am I saying that *every* substack writer suffers from this? No. I know of at
least 1 or 2 who don't, and I suepect that either they've retained an editor or
the have an in-built talent for it themselves.

### Amplified Echo Chambers Are Not The Answer

One of the problems that's been much discussed but to my mind poorly understood
is the tendency for many modern social media platforms to create hyper-polarized
tribes or herds, all engaging in certain very self similar brands of rhetoric.

While Substack does in fact reduce the size of each group, it does nothing to
combat the information bubbles that people form around themselves and their
tribe.

Creating a multitude of cults of personality, each complete with its own mimetic
megaphone and echo chamber seems like a recipe for trouble.

Only this time,everyone thinks they're being open minded and erudite.

### More Commons, Fewer Megaphones

One of the gifts the early internet bestowed upon its participants was an
appreciation for how beautiful communities can be in the small.

In those early days, forums like [USENET](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Usenet)
and bulletin board systems created safe spaces where people could interact with
people of all walks of life without regard to their political or religious
beliefs.

While Substack might appear similar, I maintain that there are some very crucial
differences, most particularly the one way nature of the platform. Sure, readers
can participate and comment on what's written, but the entire enterprise is
centered around one person. One mind. One set of beliefs and tribal alliances.

### let's Build Small, Beautiful Communities!

As technologists, we have a unique opoprtunity to help shape the nature of
online life. I'm not suggesting that we resurrect the old models, but instead
build new ones that actually work for our users and don't destroy society in the
balance.

Slack and Discord are actually great examples of this, as are blogs. I look
forward to finding other creative ways to help build a better world one tiny
community at a time through technology :)
